Business Framing Draft Notes
4.14.2025

PURPOSE:  This document describes the business question provoking an investigation into turnover by principal investigators.

HISTORY:  On 13 February 2025, Bill Prisbrey presented his Powerpoint slides titled "Grants Exploratory Phase I Winning 7b" to Dr. Erin Rothwell and others.  His section describing win rates by principal investigator (PI) characteristics elicited several questions on whether we can identify "low" and "high" performing investigators; how we can support them better; and whether we are retaining our top performers.

BACKGROUND: In order to achieve Dr. Taylor Randall's objective to increase research to a $1 B milestone, the Office of Sponsored Projects wishes to explore improving retention of high-performing principal investigators.  The Office has found that a disproportionately small percentage of investigators are responsible for the majority of research funds (consistent with the Pareto principal, where 20% of the population are responsible for 80% of the results.) The Office wonders if the high-performing few are experiencing high turn-over due to being poached or are departing for other institutions, and the financial impact if they can be retained.

STAKEHOLDERS:
Dr. Erin Rothwell
  As the Vice President for Research, Dr. Rothwell heads the Office of Sponsored Projects and is the sponsor of this analysis project.
  
  Her primary objective is accelerating the University of Utah's accomplishment of the $1 B milestone through improved retention of top-performing principal investigators.

  She is limited in her ability to directly affect retention and turn-over, as she does not sit on tenure committees nor is consulted in faculty hiring decisions.  However, she can affect policy by making recommendations to President Randall. 
  
  Although she does not sit on hiring or tenure committees and cannot directly determine faculty hiring or tenure, she can provide recommendations to President Taylor who in turn can direct HR policy and influence the Deans in recruiting and retention.
  
Deans of the colleges
  Deans of the colleges directly affect recruitment and retention policies and decisions.  They have various distinct priorities and unique criteria from one another, and unknown current policies and objectives.
  
Tenure committees
  Tenure committees consist of faculty [and who else?] who decide which faculty are awarded tenure.  Similar to the deans of the various colleges, they have distinct priorities and unique criteria from one another, and unknown current policies and objecives.  
  
Human Resources
  University HR will have knowledge of objectives, criteria, and policies for recruitment and retention.  They may be a key partner in implementing any suggested changes.  
  
  Analysts at HR may have already conducted turnover analyses by college and department. 

COMMUNICATION PLANNING: 
  The study findings will be provided to Dr. Rothwell, who will share with other parties and individuals at her discretion. 

Managing negative outcomes and perspectives:
  TBD
  
RISKS:
  An analysis of historical data carries the inherent assumption that the future will continue as the past.  However, the university faces a historical discontinuity in how federal funding is awarded and administered. 
  Despite this discontinuity and uncertainity, it is suggested that a better understanding of past behavior will optimally inform future decisions.  

AMENABILITY TO ANALYTICS: 
  
DATA AVAILABILITY:  
   - 28,790 proposals over ten years by 2,936 principal investigators from Grants Exploratory (Phase I.)
   - HR data describing employment terms
   - Funding spent [not yet analyzed]
   - Faculty database
    There may be a faculty database that contains information on faculty performance.

METHODOLOGY SELECTION:  
  Employee turn-over is a standard HR metric that is readily calculated and reasonably compared across groups using chi-squared, ANOVA, and Kruskal-Wallis methods.  More complicated approaches to predict and describe turnover include logistical regression, decisions trees, and survivor models.
  
DEPLOYABILITY:    
  Because the main study sponsor is limited in her ability to directly affect change in recruitment and retention policies, there is a risk that this study will not be actionable.
  


COSTS AND BENEFITS: 

NEXT STEP:
Refine this document based on feedback.

REFINE: 
Refine the initial problem statement and identify business constraints.    




  
  Interests
  Potential issues that could disrupt the project
  Key groups and people
  Communication planning
  Managing negative outcomes and perspectives


DRAFT NOTES:

Should I convert this to a Markdown?  Although it will look better, it will lose its accessibility of people adding comments or feeling free to modify it.  So I can keep it as a "txt" file, or I could try to publish it as a Word document.  But then I wonder how a "Word" document would look inside GitHub.



OUTLINE: 
JTA:  Business Problem Framing
TASK 1:  Identify initial problem statement and desired outcomes.
TASK 2:  Identify all stakeholders and their perspectives.
TASK 3:  Determine if the problem can be effectively addressed by analytics.
TASK 4:  Refine the initial problem statement and identify business constraints.
TASK 5:  Define an initial set of business costs and benefits
TASK 6:  Obtain stakeholder agreement on the business problem framing.

CAP GUIDE:
OPPORTUNITY OR THREAT?
WHO are the stakeholders?
WHAT is the problem or function?
WHERE does the problem occur?
WHEN does the problem occur?
WHY does the problem occur?

IDENTIFY STAKEHOLDERS
Interests; potential issues that could disrupt the project; key people; groups participating;
communication planning; manage potential negative outcomes and perspectives

AMENABLE TO ANALYTICS?
  Does the answer and change process lie in the org's control?
  Data exist or obtainable?
  Can the problem be solved or modeled?
  Can the org accept and deploy the answer?
  
  (Analytics framing)
  What is the desired result?
  WHo is the actor?
  What are the actions?
  What will be different in the organization because of this information?
  
  
REFINE PROBLEM STATEMENT AND DELINEATE CONSTRAINTS:
  Define the constraints:  analytical, financial, or political
  
DEFINE AN INITIAL SET OF BUSINESS COSTS AND BENEFITS
  Quantitative or qualitative.
  This is the business case.
  
STAKEHOLDER AGREEMENT




